# Love in relationships

In real life, we always look to express our
love towards others in some tangible way.
Only if love is demonstrated in tangible
form, it is considered to be love nowadays.

True love is like a communion. It is a
resonance between two beings. It can be
felt without any expression. It doesn’t need
communication because it is already
happening as a communion.

If you really love a person, then your very
body language will show it. It will be too
much to express in words. You will feel
that words are inadequate and will only
bring down the love that you feel. But if
you are using words, then somewhere the
love has not really happened. When you
have to speak to express love, then
somewhere there is a lie in it! You are using
the words just to decorate the lie.

Real love liberates because it doesn’t
compel you to express it all the time. It
just is. Real love also gives you the freedom
to freely express what you want to express.
You can easily express anything like
disapproval or anger and it will not be
mistaken for reduced love.

Not only that, with real love, there will be
no domination or power play in
relationships. Each person will be like a
beautiful flower that has blossomed to
radiate its unique fragrance, that’s all.

With real love, there will be no fear or
insecurity either. In normal love, physical
distance between two people causes a lot
of insecurity and a lack of trust.

A small story:

_A young soldier went to his senior
officer and said, ‘Sir, my friend is not
yet back from the battlefield. I request
permission to go out and get him.’_

_The officer said, ‘Permission refused.
Your friend is most probably dead. I
don’t want you to risk your life going
there.’_

_The young soldier went all the same and
came back mortally wounded and
carrying the corpse of his friend._

_The officer was furious. He shouted, ‘I
told you he was dead. Now I have lost
both of you. Tell me, was it worth going
out there to bring a corpse?’_

_On the verge of dying, the soldier
replied, ‘It was, Sir. When I got there
he was still alive. He said to me, I was
sure you would come.’_

Real love doesn’t look for utility. It
operates on sheer trust and is also beyond
space and time.

These days I see people gifting each other
with so many things to show their love.
Gifting has become an expression of love.
If the gifting happens as causeless
overflowing, it is okay. But if it is a
condition to be fulfilled, it becomes a
problem! Then it becomes a poor substitute
for real love.

As long as real love is there, no relationship
can become boring. Understand, as long
as love is there, every object or person is
unique. For example, if the coworker in
your office dies, nothing will really stop
you in your life. Along with the others, you
will console his family members and
continue with life, that’s all. But what
happens if you are in love with the same
coworker who passed away? Life will never
be the same again, am I right? Whenever
you are in love with some object or person,
or somebody is in love with
you, the whole relationship
becomes unique. Love makes things
unique.

One of the ashramites[^1] asked me one day,
‘_Swamiji_, everyday you see all of us, all our
mistakes and confusions. It is the same
thing for you every day. Are you not bored
by us?’ It was a very honest question! I told
them, ‘For enlightened beings, just because
of their very love, they feel everybody is
unique. They do not look at people as
mere numbers. They see each one as
unique.’

That is why, with so much patience,
masters continue to work with everybody.
If it were just a matter of numbers, it
would be very different. When you have
this love, your inner space is such that
there is no logical reason behind your
actions. You will just feel connected and
you will radiate love, that’s all!

Not only that, causeless overflowing love
is always total in its expression. It doesn’t
carry the usual dilutions of greed or fear.
So any person whom you love, you will
love totally without any reservations.
Irrespective of the way he is, you will love
him. When you love this way, even if the
person leaves your life, you will not grieve.

When a person passes away, you grieve
only because you regret not having loved
him completely. You can love him
completely only when your love itself is
complete. It doesn’t have anything to do
with the other person. It doesn’t matter
what kind of person he is. That is the
beauty of real love. It loves for the sake
of love, not for the sake of the other
person.

If you are grieving for the loss of a person,
be very clear, you are grieving because you
missed loving him in totality. If you had
loved him in totality, you would say goodbye
to him with complete restfulness, not
with grief. You grieve only because you
missed something somewhere. Even if it
is your own father or husband or wife, it is
the same. If you had radiated your
causeless love to them when they were
alive, then when they left there would not
be any regret. But if you had loved them
with rationalizations, then when they left,
the incompleteness of your love towards
them would create a hangover, and that
hangover is what you feel as grief.

[^1]: Ashramites - Residents of ashram.
