# What is Love?

Whenever we look at something, the first
thing we do is to calculate what we can
get from it. It can be a person or an object,
that doesn’t matter. Our thoughts start
functioning either through fear or through
greed to calculate what there is in the
situation for us. Our attention is centered
on that object or person.

It is possible to turn our attention towards
our own inner space and ask, ‘What can I
contribute?’, ‘What can I add?’, ‘How can
I enrich others?’ If the process is only to
ask, ‘What can I get out of it?’ then it is
driven by lust. If the process asks, ‘How
can I enrich it?’ it is driven by love! Lust is
an energy that demands. Love is an energy
that gives.

To tell you honestly, it is very difficult to
define love exactly. Mere words cannot
express it precisely. I am trying to use a
few words here and there so that some
word will click within you.

Love is an intense experience in one’s inner
space. Many of us think love is a choice.
We think experience and expression of
love are a choice. We think that if we want
to, we can handle love; otherwise we can
let it go. No! It is not a choice as we think.
It is a basic necessity of life.

When I say life, I don’t mean just breathing
and staying alive. I mean being alive at the
innermost being level, as a live
Consciousness. If you can express love, if
you can experience love, that is the only
way of being alive as a Consciousness. If
you don’t experience and express love, you
may inhale and exhale, but you can’t say
you are a live being. There are so many
animals, plants and other things that
breathe day in and day out. You will
continue to exist like them, that’s all.

A small story:

_A disciple asked a Zen[^1] master, 'Does
an enlightened master speak?'  
The master said, ‘No, an enlightened
person never speaks. Only a person
who doesn’t know enlightenment
speaks.’  
Then the disciple asked, ‘So does an
enlightened master keep quiet?’    
The master
said, ‘No, an
enlightened
master never
keeps quiet.  
If
he keeps
quiet, then he
is not enlightened.’  
The disciple was puzzled. He asked,
‘You say he neither speaks nor keeps
quiet. What does he do?’  
The master replied, ‘He sings! His being
sings. He neither speaks, nor keeps
quiet. His very being sings.’_

Love is the ultimate experience of a human
being. When the experience happens, we
will not be able to possess the experience,
only the experience will possess us! That
is what the master means. When the
experience possesses us, whatever we do
will be like a beautiful song. Any word that
comes out will be poetry. Our being will
be so light. We will simply float. Our
walking will be a dance. Our body
language will radiate grace. All our
expressions will be of great service to
humanity.

All human beings are born as loving beings.
A newborn baby radiates causeless love.
Does she know anyone around her at birth?
No! Her energy is causeless love. As we
grow, society instills fear and greed in us
and we orient our love based on greed and
fear. Then it is no longer causeless love. It
is love with a reason. It becomes
suffocating. We start feeling other
emotions like jealousy, fear and anger. We
experience only love with a cause, a reason.
But with a little awareness and awakening,
it is possible to reclaim our original love.

[^1]: Zen - Japanese Buddhist practice. Derived from dhyana, meditation.
