# Enter into causeless Love

People tell me they feel such exuding love towards me. I always tell them, use
that flowing love as a gateway to jump towards the whole of humanity. The love
towards the master is like food. If you digest it, you become energetic and you
radiate the same energy in your life.

Buddha[^1] says, ‘I live in the commune.’ He means, ‘Don’t direct your attention
towards me. Direct your attention towards the whole world.’ If the object of
love is removed, then the whole world becomes the object. Then you will never
enter into suffering.

The first thing we need to understand is that relationships can happen
causelessly, without any reason. Only then will we understand that the
experience of love is much more important than the object of love.

You must have at least one relationship in your life that exists for no reason.
If you don’t have such a relationship, be very clear, even if you have money,
deep down you are still poor.

From today onwards start relating with someone for no reason. There should be no
monetary or physical benefit from the relationship. If you experience causeless
love once, after that, if the money is shared, if the body is shared, it is
okay. The quality is totally different. I am not against money or against
marriage. I am not against the physical relationship, but if it becomes the
center of your life, you are missing something very important. That is what I
want to convey here. You miss a major dimension or energy center of your being.

I am reminded of a small story:

_There was a blind girl who hated herself because she was blind. She hated
everyone except her boyfriend._

_The girl told her boyfriend that if she could only see the world, she would
marry him._

_A few days later, her doctor told her that someone donated a pair of eyes to
her. She underwent the surgery and she opened her eyes to see everything,
including her boyfriend._

_Her boyfriend asked her, ‘Now that you can see, will you marry me?’ The girl
was shocked when she saw that her boyfriend was blind. She said, ‘I am sorry but
I can’t marry you because you are blind.’_

_Her boyfriend walked away sadly. He told her just one thing, ‘Just take care of
my eyes, dear.’_

That is why it is said that you have to create your being. You have to awaken
the center of love in you. You should have at least one relationship in your
life from which you do not expect anything beyond just the relationship. You
should develop one relationship in which you do not receive any utility from
that relationship, be it monetary or physical comfort or name and fame. Have at
least one relationship... it could even be with a tree or the moon or the sun.
The criterion is that you should not have any benefit from the relationship.
Only then you will understand the word ‘love’. Only then the love center in you
will be awakened.

I always tell people, ‘Do some work for half hour everyday that does not bring
you money or name and fame. Just for half an hour, go to some temple or church,
clean and sweep the floor, offer some service. Don’t plan to become a committee
member in that place! Don’t think that it will fetch you good credit and a place
in heaven... no. Don’t look any further than that work for half an hour.’

Initially you may think, ‘This half hour is a waste of time!’ After a few days
you will realize that only in that half hour are you really alive! Only for that
half hour you are not driven by fear or greed. You smile at the people around
you without any calculation. You feel strangely sincere in a way that you never
felt before.

If you observe yourself at other times, you will see that you even smile only
after some mental calculation. Even before laughing you will see who is the
person next to you. Based on that, you decide how many inches to open your
mouth, how polite you should be, how you should project yourself. To overcome
these conditionings, just for half an hour try this technique that does not
bring you money, that does not bring you name and fame, that does not give you
any social position, that does not give you anything in return. Then you will
understand what I mean by the words ‘causeless relationship’. You will see that
soon only that half hour becomes the real life for you!

As of now, every action of yours is driven by fear and greed. You are fuelled by
fear and greed. That’s why you feel lonely and tired.

If you try this technique, you will suddenly see that your body and mind start
functioning without the need for fear and greed! Once you learn this simple
knack of how to move your body without fear and greed, be very clear, you can
enter into love. You learn how to tap into the energy of love. You learn how to
run your life on the beautiful energy of love. Only then will you know what is
meant by the word ‘love’.

A new center will be awakened in you. A new energy will start radiating in you.
Then you will understand how loving and causeless relationships are possible.

[^1]: Buddha - Enlightened master and founder of the religion of Buddhism.
