# Be a lover every moment

Encounter any situation in life with deep
love. Soon you will become pure love.
Whether it is a person or your work or a
passerby or god or anything, just encounter
it with deep love for love’s sake. If you
are a painter, just be completely in love
with painting. If you are a dancer, be
completely in love with dancing. If you are
working with your computer, treat it with
utmost love and become lost in it. Just be
completely sincere and completely in love
every moment.

If you are painting and at the same time
thinking about which gallery to put up the
painting in or how much to sell it for, then
be very clear, you are not lost in love. You
are in love only with some particular thing,
which is money in this case. If you are
dancing while calculating what you will get
once you finish the dance, then be very
clear you are not lost in love. You create
more and vmore bondage by doing this.
Even when a master  happens in your life
you do the same thing to him.

I tell people, ‘I am showing you the moon
by pointing at it with my finger. If you look
at the moon, you will experience what I
experience. Instead if you cling to my
finger, you will neither see the moon nor
will you relax!’

If you become lost in every moment, you
become love. Then, when you work you
work with the utmost focus because you
are in deep love with it. This way, your
very life becomes a deep meditative love.

Then you start feeling, relating and
respecting everything as a living being, just
as you are. You even start feeling the other
person’s thoughts. You start responding and
relating to the other person without him
or her opening up to you. You feel the
cosmos as a translucent, ever-living
presence. You have tremendous
intelligence. You know exactly how to
connect to things. Such is the power of
love.

Real love keeps you in the moment. It
gives you tremendous awareness. That is
why it is so powerful. Nothing is as intense
as being in the moment. Love is
experiencing life moment to moment, in
its totality. And it is not about two persons
or any object. It is just love for love’s sake,
that’s all. If you get a glimpse of real love
experienced in the moment, you can
nurture it within you and make it grow to
fill your whole being and life. That spark
is enough!

Then you become a wonderful creator
because love energy is also creative
energy. That is why poets express such
creativity. They lose themselves in love
and become blissful creators. Out of the
freshness of the moment, the creativity
happens.

The Sufi[^1] mystic Jalaluddin Rumi[^2] says,
‘Wherever you are, whatever your
condition is, always try to be a lover!’ The
whole of Existence is in a deep romance
with itself. You are part of it. So it is your
nature to be a lover every moment. Only
by being that can you experience the real
fulfillment of your original nature.

[^1]: Sufi - Mystical dimension of Islam.
[^2]: Jalaluddin Rumi - 13th century Persian Sufi poet.
