# Love is the root of all religion

Love is the original religion. It is the root of all spirituality. All other
religions are offshoots. Love is like the root of the tree and all religions are
like leaves or branches. Even the greatest religions are only big branches
compared to the religion of love!

Love has no temple or scripture. It is like the roots that lie beneath the
ground but provide the nourishment for life. Without it, the whole tree dies.
Through love many branches and leaves are created. But what do we do? We cling
to the branches and leaves instead of clinging to the root. When we cling to the
root, we get the direct nourishment. When we cling to the branches, we enjoy
only one dimension of the nourishment. When you become more loving, you will
enter the invisible temple of love.

Tree roots contain the information about all the trees in this world, just like
a dewdrop contains information about all the oceans in the world. If we
understand the structure of a drop of water, we will understand everything about
all the oceans on earth. We will understand the compound called water itself.
Water anywhere cannot be anything other than its chemical composition. That
composition is ingrained in the smallest particle, and that is the dew drop.

In the same way, man is an atom of love. And love is nothing but the quality of
Existence. If love is known, the whole of Existence can be experienced.
Understand that the composition of man is not physical, chemical or even
psychological, it is spiritual. Nobody can teach us what it is. We must
experience it on our own. All other knowledge is transferable: physical,
chemical, scientific and psychological. All such knowledge is easily
transferable. Only spiritual knowledge is not. It cannot be taught as such, but
it can be experienced!

A small story:

_One day a master asked his disciples how they could tell when the night had
ended and the day had begun._

_One of them said, ‘When you can look in the distance and tell whether the
animal is a cow or a horse.’ The master said, ‘No.’_

_Another disciple said, ‘When you can look at a tree in the distance and tell if
it is a pine tree or a mango tree.’ The master again said, ‘No.’_

_They asked the master, ‘Then what is it master?’_

_The master replied, ‘When you can look into the face of any man and recognize
your brother in him. When you can look into the face of any woman and recognize
your sister in her. If you cannot do this, then no matter what time of the day
it is, it is still only night time.’_

The master can give a few hints, little hints here and there. Then we must find
our own way carefully, cautiously. Love is just a hint, but if we follow love
slowly, very slowly, we will be surprised that god becomes more and more of a
reality. He is no longer just a thought, no longer simply an idea, but something
that we can feel. The deeper we go into love, the closer we come to the feeling.
The day we dissolve into love we merge with unity.

Love is the secret of all religions. In spite of this, people are lost in logic
and theology. Theology is as far away from religion as anything can be. There
can be no logic about god, there can be only love. God is in poetry. He is in
music and in dance, but never in logic.

God is not an idea that can be arrived at through logical processes. He is an
interior experience, so deeply interior that one must go there absolutely alone
to discover it.

From time immemorial, the conclusion of many mystics has been that matter is
glued together with love. An invisible force keeps atoms and molecules together.
They do not fall apart because of this invisible force. Science has yet to
discover this ultimate energy. It has detected a few of its manifestations such
as gravitation and electricity but these are only gross manifestations. The day
that science discovers love will be the day when religion and science will
commune with each other in the same language.

For now, just rejoice because love is possible. Be joyful that love is your
inner potential. You can rise to the ultimate heights with love. Nothing is
impossible with love because love can transform itself into god.
