# Love heals five types of restlessness

The word ‘love’ is loaded with so many different meanings, interpretations and
commentaries. First, let us leave out the idea of selfless and spiritual love.
Let us first consider the normal, simple love with all its possessiveness,
jealousy and all the side effects it causes! Even that love can do a lot of good
for the body and mind. Later we will discuss selfless, spiritual love or mature
love.

The other day I was reading an article in a magazine. The title was, ‘Live
Forever’. I was amazed to read it. It gave eleven techniques to extend your life
by at least twenty years and it was supported by statistics and survey reports.
All the eleven techniques were related to love. It said that even caring for a
pet animal releases a hormone in us that allows us to live at ease with our
body. If caring for our pet animals does so much, surely caring for the husband
or for the wife will do a lot more!

The article also spoke of how people die early if they are single or widowers
and how life is extended with love. It also spoke of how chances of getting
cancer or depression are less when you have love in your life. Even what we call
ordinary love, simple infatuation, can do miracles for our body and mind. It can
give us a deep feeling of healing and wellbeing.

According to Tantra[^1], five types of restlessness happen in a person and all
of these can be healed by ordinary love, by the simple caring for one another.
Once again, I am not speaking of spiritual love or devotion or selfless love.
That comes later.

A small story:

_A school boy fell in love with a girl from his own grade. One day he was
kidnapped by an extremist group and sent to a camp across the border for
training. A few months later he came back to his homeland to spread terror. He
entered his village to find that the family of his beloved was killed by
terrorists. He met the girl and they started talking. She told him how much she
hated what was happening and begged him to stop what he was doing. She told him
she would marry him only if he surrendered to the authorities. The boy
immediately surrendered and joined the army fighting the insurgency while
carrying a photograph of the girl in his pocket all the time._

Let us first talk of simple, practical love that you share with someone for some
reason, either because the person will support you socially or support you when
you face some difficulty or just because you want to maintain a good
relationship with that person. For any of these reasons you may show love. Even
this type of love heals you from the following five kinds of restlessness.

The first kind of restlessness happens due to your circumstances. Sometimes, in
a particular place or situation you feel restless. If you move from that place
or situation, you feel more settled. Even under uncomfortable circumstances, if
you just show a gesture of love to someone, or if someone shows a gesture of
love to you, things can become instantly better for you! It can heal you.

The second kind of restlessness is physical. Physical restlessness is nothing
but a constant tension in your body for no particular reason. It is said that
all such tension can be released when you express love to somebody. You may ask,
‘How can love take away physical restlessness?’ You can see for example, a
mother who has a child to look after will feel continuously rejuvenated in spite
of the child driving her crazy! Because of the love element, she will cope with
the tension. Otherwise, taking care of children is not an easy job!

The rejuvenation happens because of the love and care the mother feels for the
child. Any tension or restlessness in the body disappears when you care for
somebody, when you smile at somebody, when you express love in your body
language, even if it is just once.

When you express yourself through your head, it is called intelligence. When you
express yourself through your heart, it is felt as love. When you express
yourself through your being, it is experienced as energy. When you relax into
your being without expressing, it is bliss! Each one is the same energy but
expressed in four different ways.

So whenever you express love, you express energy also. Love is concentrated,
caring energy. So naturally, whenever you express love you become a channel for
healing energy. When you are a channel for energy, you not only heal others but
heal yourself as well.

The third form of restlessness is mental. Any mental restlessness can be healed
by love. Research indicates that when you care for pets or play with children,
you reduce the possibility of heart attacks and also reduce the risk of fatal
diseases!

The fourth form of restlessness is emotional. Mental restlessness is different
from emotional restlessness. Mental restlessness is purely intellectual and can
be controlled easily. But emotional restlessness cannot be controlled by just a
few words of consolation. It can be healed only when you express love. When you
start radiating love, it floods your being with energy. When your being is
opened to such higher energies, it heals the emotional restlessness.

Ultimately, we come to spiritual restlessness. There are so many people who can
sit with others, who can sit with the television, who can sit with newspapers,
but who can’t sit with themselves. This is what is called spiritual
restlessness. Spiritual restlessness means that you cannot sit with yourself.
You can give appointments to everybody else but not to yourself!

Your love for the teacher or the master can heal your spiritual restlessness.
Many people come and tell me, ‘Swamiji, just sitting in your presence puts us in
a calm state but when we go back home, we are not able to remain in that
calmness. Why is it so?’ When you are in the presence of an enlightened person,
you start relating, you start expressing your love towards him automatically.
This heals your spiritual restlessness.

If you observe when I speak, I often give long gaps between words. The gaps are
actually used to bring down your spiritual restlessness. When you sit in front
of the television, you are able to sit so comfortably because information is
just pushed into your being without a break. You aren’t given a chance to
experience your restlessness. So while your restlessness is actually supported
and increased, you don’t experience it and you feel very comfortable.

But here, if you have the patience to sit and listen to these words with the
gaps, your spiritual restlessness will come down and the tendency of your mind
to ask for the next thought will also come down. You automatically become
receptive and these words will not only touch your head, but they will directly
touch your heart as well. If you are totally relaxed and at ease with yourself
without too many thoughts, your being will open, taking in everything and be
healed.

If your mind is calm, just listening is enough. There is no need to even
meditate separately later. The very listening itself can create the experience
in you. If your listening is not proper, then it is difficult for the experience
to happen. J. Krishnamurti[^2], the famous philosopher says, ‘Listening is god.’
Deep and total listening without restlessness is divine. That itself is god. If
you look deeply into your being, the very presence of the master that causes
love to happen in you heals the spiritual restlessness.

So even simple, normal love heals all five types of restlessness.

[^1]:
    Tantra - Ancient vedic tradition of achieving enlightenment through
    spiritual techniques or practices, meditations and ritual worship.

[^2]: J. Krishnamurti - Renowned Indian philosopher.
