# Love, hatred and attention-need

As long as love is conditional, hatred and love are opposite sides of the same
coin. Love can flip into hatred the moment we feel that our expectations are
threatened.

In love of this type, it remains love only as long as the conditions remain as
expected. The moment the conditions change, the love also changes.

Often what we believe as love is actually related to time and space. So long as
the distance between the lovers is large and the time of contact is minimal,
they feel love towards each other. However, once they get closer and spend more
time together, they feel that they are not so much in love after all! That is
why they say ‘familiarity breeds contempt’. Familiarity can also convert love
into hatred. To transcend both love and hatred, we first need to drop
expectations. Expectation is the first enemy of love.

We all go through several stages of relationships in our lifetime. If you
observe very closely, whichever stage we are in, when we ask for love we are
actually asking only for the other person’s attention. When we say a person
doesn’t love us, we actually mean that the other person doesn’t give us enough
attention. The basic need for any human being is attention from others. The
attention-need, along with our dependency on others for survival, is what we
experience as love.

The dependency on others might be psychological, physical or spiritual. For
example, when you expect someone to lend you a shoulder to cry on, you are
dependent upon him or her psychologically. When you expect someone to provide
you with money or fulfill your bodily pleasures, you are dependent upon him or
her physically. In whatever way people may fulfill this dependency, what it
boils down to is the attention that they give us! The whole idea of love is
nothing but getting the attention of the other in some way.

In the first session of our meditation camp, I ask people to make an honest list
of at least one or two persons in their lives who they really love. Usually in
the beginning, people come up with a big list: husband, wife, father, mother,
brother, sister and so on. They include people whom they would like to please or
need to please in order to be happy themselves. As they hear me talk about real
love, they start crossing out names from their list one by one! Understand, if
you cross out something, then it was not truly there in the first place.

Many people include certain people in their love list because these people give
them a ‘feel good’ feeling. What do I mean by a ‘feel good’ feeling? It is a
certificate saying, ‘You are good. You are this, you are that’ etc. We love
anyone who pays us compliments, is it not? We think twice before arguing with
them. We secretly nurture our good name with them in the name of love. If they
go back on their approval of us, we might fall into depression, so we continue
to please them and love them. Like this, there is always some hidden reason for
our love.

Some people tell me, ‘No _Swamiji_, I don’t love my son or daughter for any of
these reasons.’ I ask them, ‘Alright, if your son suddenly starts to make his
own decisions, if he suddenly doesn’t fit into your framework, if he doesn’t
follow your guidance, if he doesn’t live according to your rules, will your love
for him be the same?’

They tell me, ‘No, it will not. My love will be reduced a little!’

What does this mean? We love our next generation as long as they are extensions
of our life. As long as they fall into our pattern of thinking, as long as they
live in accordance with our conventions, we love them. We simply fulfill our own
desires through them. We fulfill our lives through them. Whatever we couldn’t
accomplish in our youth, we try to accomplish through them. We use them as an
extension of our own lives. If we wanted to be doctors and couldn’t for some
reason, we inspire them to be doctors. As long as they act and live as an
extension of our life, the relationship is beautiful. But the moment they start
deciding on their own, the moment they feel we are suffocating them, the moment
they stand up and say ‘no’, the relationship takes a different turn.

A small story:

_There were three grownups having their morning tea together. Their children
were playing on the floor. They were discussing what they would do if danger
threatened, and all of them declared that the first thing they would do was pick
up their children and escape._

_Suddenly, the safety valve of the pressure cooker burst, creating a steam
explosion in the room. Within seconds, everyone was out of the kitchen – except
for the children playing on the floor!_

Our love is not as great as we claim it to be! Even we don’t know the real depth
of our love, that’s the problem. We say and do a lot of things in the name of
love. But reality can be shockingly different from all that. If we integrate the
love emotion in us, it can become a highly sincere and authentic expression of
our original nature.
