# Love yourself first

The big problem today is that most people don’t love themselves. Society never
teaches that it is possible to love ourselves.

Understand that unless you love yourself, you cannot possibly love another
person. Only when you lose yourself to yourself can you lose yourself to others.
We are taught that we can only love even ourselves if we have a reason. If we
perform well, we love ourselves. If we fail, we hate ourselves. We apply the
same logic to others. We love them only because of something, never without a
cause or a reason.

When you don’t love yourself, you become cynical and negative towards life. When
you were alone in your mother’s womb, you were completely loving and blissful.
In your aloneness in the womb you experienced your loving self. That is why you
will see that you assume the fetal posture whenever you lie down with
insecurity. Blissful aloneness is your original nature. Once you came into the
world, society conditioned you to believe that you needed people and television
to be loving and happy. It never nurtured your original quality. Your original
quality is blissful aloneness. If you get back in touch with that, you will
settle down and feel peaceful and relaxed within yourself.

For a few minutes every day, just sit by yourself and feel overflowing love
towards yourself. Feel what a wonderful being you are. Feel how much you have
taken yourself for granted. Feel yourself as part of Existence and love yourself
for it. Melt with the feeling of love for yourself. If you practice this
everyday you will see that where you were once hard and self-centered, now you
have become soft and loving.

When you deeply settle down within yourself with peace and love, bliss will
explode in you. When your nerves are clean, when your nervous system is cleaned
by peace, bliss will explode. You will start expressing the same bliss that is
expressed in the master’s body language.

Then when people love you, you don’t feel guilty or unworthy because just as
they love you, you love yourself too. You become ready to receive love from
others. Usually when others show love to you, you feel guilty or unworthy
because you don’t feel you are worth being loved. Once you settle within
yourself with deep love, you will receive others’ love with joy.
