# The unity of Love

Children feel that they are adults only when they say ‘no’ to their parents. It
is a basic instinct. When they say ‘no’ they feel that they are established as
an individual. That is why, all over the world, youngsters always rebel. Whether
it is in the West or in the East, in all the countries all over the world, in
all the cultures, the youth say ‘no’. When they say ‘no’, they feel they are
strong.

But our love is dependent only on ‘yes’. As long as we receive ‘yes’, our love
also is ‘yes’. When we get a ‘no’, we also start saying ‘no’. This is called
horizontal love. It starts and ends horizontally. It starts again and ends
again. It always ends with some reason or other. There is another love called
vertical love. It never ends because it never starts. It is always there in the
form of energy. It is consciousness. Vertical love is when we suddenly realize
that we are living inside everybody just as we live inside our own body!

There is a beautiful example given in the _Upanishads_[^1]:

_A master asked his disciple, ‘Do you enjoy all your five senses?’_

_The disciple said, ‘Yes.’_

_The master asked, ‘What if one of your senses was missing, would you have the
same amount of joy?’_

_The disciple replied, ‘No, it would be twenty percent less, and if two of my
senses were missing, it would be forty percent less.’_

_The master suddenly said, ‘What if you had five more senses?’_

_The disciple answered, ‘Naturally my enjoyment would be a hundred percent
extra._

_If I am given one more body, naturally I will enjoy everything twice as much.
Or if I am given five bodies, naturally I will enjoy things five times as
much.’_

If you are able to experience yourself as being alive in all the bodies of this
world, imagine how much joy or ecstasy you would experience! It would be
immeasurable, eternal and ultimate. That is what enlightened people experience
all the time. They experience themselves as the whole universe. They experience
tremendous ecstasy. That is why they don’t need anything from the outer world.
They are enough unto themselves. They are established in the highest form of
love energy.

In Krishna’s[^2] life, the whole happening of _Ras Leela_[^3] is one of
causeless love, the Divine love that permeates the entire universe. Ras Leela is
misinterpreted by many people as Krishna having a physical relationship with the
cowherd women. Understand, Krishna is a superconscious being and Ras Leela
happened when Krishna was around eight years old! It is in no way related to any
physical relationship. It was a pure and causeless spiritual happening.

Radha[^4], Krishna’s beloved, was attached to Krishna, but she never really
experienced pure joy. She had constant mood swings with possessiveness and
jealousy. During Ras Leela, Krishna, as a superconscious being, gave her the
experience of seeing him simultaneously with every single cowherd girl present
there. He wanted to show her that he is in every physical form, not just in his
own form. Such is the manifestation of divine loving beings!

There is another beautiful poem by Jalaluddin Rumi[^5], the Sufi[^6] mystic. He
writes:

_One went to the door of the Beloved and knocked._

_A voice asked, ‘Who is there?’_

_He answered, ‘It is I.’_

_The voice said, ‘There is no room for Me and Thee.’_

_The door was shut._

_After a year of solitude and deprivation he returned and knocked._

_A voice from within asked, ‘Who is there?’_

_The man said, ‘It is Thee.’_

_The door was opened for him._

_In real love, there is no duality. There is just oneness with everyone and
everything. That is the ultimate stage of love._

[^1]:
    _Upanishads_ - Scriptures that form the essence of the ancient texts of the
    Vedas. Literally means ‘sitting with the master’. There are eleven main
    _Upanishads_ that have been commented on by enlightened master Adi Shankara.

[^2]:
    Krishna - Enlightened master from India who delivered the Truths of the
    Bhagavad Gita.

[^3]:
    Ras Leela - The spiritual interaction of enlightened master Krishna with the
    gopis or cowherd women devotees.

[^4]:
    Radha - Chief among the gopis or cowherd women devotees of enlightened
    master Krishna.

[^5]: Jalaluddin Rumi - 13th century Persian Sufi poet.
[^6]: Sufism - Mystical dimension of Islam.
