# Be open - not philosophizing

If you observe, you will have a very definite mental setup towards the people
you live with everyday. You will practically know all the dialogues that might
happen between you and them. You will know exactly that if you start the
conversation in a particular way, in just what way the other person will
respond! If you start the dialogue in another way, you will know exactly how the
other person’s response will change. You have a virtual script of all the
possible everyday dialogues in your head.

Only if someone comes up with a new dialogue or behavior are you a little shaken
or disturbed, and you don’t know how to answer or react. Those are the only few
minutes you start wondering about how to respond. Otherwise, you know the
dialogue for the whole day. You know how it should start, when it will take a
turn and how it will end. It is a dead dialogue. There is no life in it.

The problem is that we have all practically become philosophers. We don’t
understand that life is not philosophy. It is spontaneous flowing energy. It is
new every moment. Philosophy is all about repeating the same old things in
different ways, that’s all. There’s nothing fresh in it. Life is fresh every
moment. Philosophy robs life of the freshness.

A small story:

_Ten philosophers were imprisoned in a country. They were kept together in one
cell. They decided that somehow they should escape from the prison. They sat and
made a big plan. They got the mold of the prison door key and made a duplicate
key._

_Finally, they chose the date of escape. The whole plan was clearly laid out.
They decided that on the particular night, two of them will open the prison door
with the duplicate key and signal to the others. The others would escape and
these two would follow after locking the door behind them._

_The day of escape dawned and two of them went to open the door. The rest of
them waited for the signal. They waited and waited but never got any signal.
Three hours passed. Suddenly the two who had gone to open the door came back and
said, ‘We have to drop our plan to escape. It can’t happen today. We will have
to do it some other day. We will have to reschedule our escape.’_

_The others asked, ‘Why, what happened?’_

_They replied, ‘What to do? The foolish guards forgot to lock the prison door!’_

Those who philosophize cannot think of anything new! It has to be the same old
mental setup. If there is some change or some new situation, they cannot think
creatively to deal with it, because they are not open. They are like a closed
circuit.

We have also become like philosophers when dealing with our lives. We are stuck
in patterns of the past. We are never in the moment. If anything new happens, we
are at a loss.

The person who experiences the ‘ever living presence’ experiences life in its
freshness. He is also the one who is open and available. He constantly
experiences the oneness with everything around him. Understand, being open means
respecting every thing as equal to you. It means considering each other as equal
and being open to change. ‘Available’ means that you are clear that the source
of everything in this universe is Existence and that you are available to it
every moment. That is the meaning of being available. It is recognizing the
profundity of Existence of which all things are part. If you are open and
available, you are no more a philosopher. You are ready to open up to life with
love.

With philosophy, you have fixed ideas, and you become very assertive. When you
are too assertive, you can’t love. Assertion is an aggressiveness that does not
allow love to come in. When you are too sure and filled with preconceived ideas,
then where is the space for love to enter? Love needs beautiful space in order
to blossom.

With philosophy, there is no room for love to settle in its existential state.
If you really want to experience the taste of nectar, can you experience it
through just a set of ideas about it? No! You need to taste the nectar yourself,
give it some space, allow it to fill you and settle in its existential state.
Only then you will know its taste. In the same way, to experience love, just a
few ideas alone will not help. You need to allow it to grow in its existential
state in your inner space. Then you will know it. Allow it to happen in your
heart, not in the head. Decide to be with the heart. Then it will grow and
happen.

What was once a failure within the head can become a success within the heart!
Love is really a success of the heart that every individual should experience.
It is easy to stay in the head. It is, after all, a mundane and familiar
intellect. It requires courage to come down to the heart, because with the heart
nothing is familiar, everything is fresh. At the head level you have a solid
identity and familiar patterns. At the heart level there is no identity, no
pattern. It is an open space. To enter into it, you need tremendous courage.
That is why love is fearsome for many people. It is an unfamiliar zone. With the
head, there is comfortable familiarity.
