# Preface

Many reputed intellectuals including scientists have recorded that there has
been an elevation in human consciousness in recent times. Whether it is to do
with the Age of Aquarius as rock groups foresaw or the metaphorical end of the
world as the Mayans predicted is not the question here.

The question is, how do we define consciousness? As societal beings who have
been guided all our lives by moral and legal commandments, our beacon of
behavior has always been conscience. But conscience is not consciousness.

Consciousness is the awareness that there is something more to our life than the
material pleasures that we seek. Consciousness is that tension within us that
tells us there is something higher than what we see. It is the beacon of inner
awareness that guides us to a state of being where we realize that we are more
than what we think we are.

Human beings are far more than mere bio machines. This is why even the most
powerful computer would never be able to replace the human. It can replace the
mind and the body but not the energy of the human being. It might be a fact that
we ascended from animals. But it is the truth that we can go further.

From time immemorial wise men of all cultures have pondered deep into this
simple yet intangible issue of what lies within us. ‘Who am I’ has been the
refrain of many sages. Many did find the answer. Their answers were
experiential. The scriptures of all great religions are the expressions of these
wise masters to convey their experience to us. When they live, the masters
themselves are the experience that we can share.

Paramahamsa Nithyananda is such an experience.

This book is the first volume of the essence of the wisdom of Nithyananda that
has so far been expressed. Nithyananda has spoken in a number of structured
programs. He has commented on great scriptures like the Bhagavad Gita and spoken
to large public and small private groups over the last five years. This book is
an essence of these teachings.

This book takes you through an understanding of why we behave the way we do and
explains how we can change the way we act so that we are in synchronicity with
the energy of the cosmos. Meditation techniques provided in this book help you
to experience this synchronicity.

The understanding and the experience that we are one with the energy outside us
expands our consciousness. We realize that we are one with every other
individual, however different the individual may be in culture, color, language,
religion or tribe. We realize that we are all waves in the same cosmic ocean.

This experience is Living Enlightenment. This experience is Nithyananda.

While there is some order in the way the chapters are structured, you may move
back and forth in any order to read the subject of your choice. All chapters are
interconnected with the common thread of Living Enlightenment. Yet, each one is
an individual pathway to the experience and not a sequential step. In this book,
references of non-English words have been explained as footnotes on the first
three occurrences of the word, and explained in the glossary as well.

As you go deeper into the experience and feel the need to interact with others
who experience a similar need, visit https://kailaasa.org. You can also join one
of the many hundred Worldwide Spiritual Embassies around the world and interact
with others who are already on this path.

This book is an amazing journey into Existential Truths and a gift from an
enlightened master of this millennium.

-Nithyananda Publishers
