# What is Worry?

We talked of love so far. Love is about our relationship with others. Love is
also about our relationship with ourselves. Without loving ourselves we cannot
love others. What prevents us from loving our own self is the constant worry or
irritation that we generate within us. Whether things go right or wrong we
worry. There is nothing more corrosive to our self-esteem than worry. What is
this worry?

A small story:

_A man walked into a bar looking worried and upset._

_The bartender asked him, ‘What’s the matter? You look very worried about
something.’_

_The man said, ‘My wife and I had a fight and she told me that she wouldn’t talk
to me for a month.’_

_The bartender consoled him, ‘It’s okay. One month isn’t that long.’_

_The man said, ‘I know. The month is up today!’_

Everyone has his or her own set of worries! If I ask you what you worry about,
you will tell me, ‘I don’t have a job, that’s my worry.’ Your neighbor will say,
‘My job is my main worry!’ Someone else will say, ‘My children are my worry.’
Another person will say, ‘I don’t have children, that’s my worry!’

One person’s dream is another person’s worry! You will not find any logic in it
at all.

What is meant by ‘worry’? Worry arises whenever things are not happening as you
want them to happen. It is the discrepancy between your expectations and
reality. For example, you feel your son should stay at home with you, whereas he
feels he should be by himself, away from you. You feel your salary should be a
few thousand dollars more. Your boss feels otherwise. You want to finish your
project by a certain time. But things are happening too slowly and it seems an
impossible task. These are all causes for worry. What you want and expect does
not match what others want and expect.

You continuously expect things to happen in a certain way. Whether it is as big
as your career or as small as what time your husband should come home for a
meal, you continuously impose your will upon what is happening and worry about
it.
