# See what is as it IS – and move on

Buddha[^1], an enlightened master, used the
word tathata - seeing what is as it IS. It is
seeing what is there as it is, without any
judgment.

But most of
the time we see
things only
through our
_worry_. When
we see
everything as it is, there is only joy, and
when there is joy, no thoughts get recorded
in you. There are only empty spaces. That
is why when you are joyful you feel light,
because nothing gets recorded. When you
see everything through worry, more
thoughts get recorded in you and you feel
heavy.

There is a common saying, ‘We don’t see
things as they are. We see things as we are.’
If you feel there is something wrong with
what you are seeing, then you should look
back in at yourself because what you see
outside is only a reflection of what is inside
you. If you feel pure love inside, then you
see only pure love outside. It always has
to do with you, not with what you are
seeing.

How can you keep thoughts away from
what truly IS? How can you enjoy each
moment all the time?

Try this small technique. When you see
something, for example a person, or a
situation, or a book, or anything, normally
old thoughts and familiar reactions
immediately
rise in you.
Bring in the
awareness
that these
conditioned thoughts and memories cloud
your judgment and visualize shattering
those thoughts. Next, see the situation, or
person, or object now with a fresh eye, as
though you are seeing it for the first time!
Suddenly you see how much you missed,
because of your own worry and thoughts.

Even when you see your husband, wife,
brother, or anyone, look at them as though
you are seeing them for the first time.
Suddenly, you realize that not only does
worry not arise, but also that you start
seeing everyone alike, whether they are
strangers or familiar to you. That is the
right way. No one is familiar or unchanging.
Even your wife is not known to you.
Everyone is constantly changing every
moment along with Existence. Only your
mind is trying to make them appear to be
permanent.

Once you start seeing what is as it is, all
your energy will integrate within you. There
is no more worry, no more conflict. Worry
arises because your thoughts resist what
you see. Once the conflict disappears, all
the energy invested in worry is released for
you to integrate!

Some one asked J. Krishnamurti[^2], the
famous Indian philosopher, how to fall in
tune with what IS. He beautifully says, ‘Just
don’t name it, you will find you are in tune
with it!’

Usually, when we see something, we either
try to identify with it or we try to condemn
it. For example, if you are told you are
arrogant, you either accept it or you try not
to be arrogant! You never understand or
go beyond arrogance. You can only
understand within your frame of reference,
what you are familiar with. Because of this,
you are caught in a limited view of
possibilities. To really understand, you
need to go beyond this limited point-of-
view. To do that, you have to stop naming
it arrogance, that’s all! There will be no
more arrogance. Only by naming it, you
start the conflict. That is how you see what
IS – by not naming it.

_One man got onto a bus and sat down
next to a young man. He could see that
the man was a hippy. He was wearing
only one shoe._

_He asked him, ‘You have lost one shoe?’_

_The young man replied, ‘No, I have
found one shoe.’_

Stop naming any situation, person, or
thing! Just see, that’s all. Don’t give room
for condemning or accepting thoughts.

Initially there’s a compulsion to pass
judgment on anything that you see because
that is your habit. But when you experience
the great energy released in you by seeing
what IS, you want to remain that way –
free from thoughts, worry, and suffering.

When you see what is as it is, you are in
heaven. When you want to see what you
want to see, you are in hell. If you
understand that everything is
auspiciousness, you will drop expectation
and see things as they are, because
everything is auspiciousness.

A small story:

_One disciple kept asking the master,
‘Master, where is paradise?’_

_Finally one day, the master asked him,
‘Do you really want to know?’_

_The disciple sat up and said, ‘Yes!’_

_The master said, ‘Alright, my first
disciple Hemachandra is in paradise.’
After saying these words the master
closed his eyes and went into
meditation._

_The disciple knew it would be a long
time before the master opened his eyes.
So, he went and asked some of the
disciples if they knew where
Hemachandra lived. No one seemed to
know._

_Finally one disciple said, ‘I know how
to guide you there, but I have never
been there myself. It is in a deep valley
beyond a range of ice covered
mountains.’_

_The disciple wrote down the directions
carefully and went back to the master.
He told him, ‘Master, I wish to pay a
visit to Hemachandra!’_

_The master was absorbed deeply in some
work. Without even looking up he said,
‘Go ahead.’_

_The disciple started on his journey. He
walked for many days, passing through
sun, rain, snow, and what not. He
became exhausted, on the verge of
death. It took him one hundred days to
reach the valley. When he finally
reached it he looked at the valley and
thought, ‘This valley doesn’t look all
that great. I have seen many more
beautiful valleys. Why did the master
call this paradise?’_

_He looked around and walked further
and finally found Hemachandra’s hut.
Hemachandra was very pleased to see
him. He served him food and asked how
the master and other disciples were
doing._

_All along, the disciple was thinking to
himself, ‘Master called this place
paradise? I can’t believe it.’_

_After a week-long stay he left and
returned to his master. It took him
another one
hundred days
to return
home._

_He went
straight to the
master and stated, ‘You said that the
place is paradise. But what I saw was
the most ordinary place ever!’_

_The master said, ‘Oh god! At the time
of your enquiry, had you been more
explicit about your intention, I would
have told you the truth.’_

_The disciple asked, ‘What is the truth?’_

_The master replied, ‘Hemachandra is
not in paradise. Paradise is in him!’_

When you live close to Existence, without
any expectation, seeing what is as it is and
finding the blessings in it, you will carry
heaven in you! Heaven is not geographical,
it is psychological. It is not physical, it is
mental. If you decide, you can be in heaven
right now.

Many people get worried about what they
see in their dreams and come to me for
interpretations. I tell them that we are
unable to even accept what happens in
reality, then why bother about what
happens in our dreams?

_One day, a man dreamt a strange dream
and became very curious to know what
the dream meant. He went to his master,
told him about the dream and asked for
an explanation._

_The master told him, ‘Come to me with
dreams that come to you in your wakeful
state. We will work them out. The dreams
of your sleep belong neither to my
wisdom, nor to your imagination.’_

If you are still worried about your dreams,
you should know that dreams tell you
about the state of your mind during the
day. Learn from your dreams and think
how to transform the mind during the
daytime. For example, if you think too
much about lust when you are awake, your
dreams will be lustful. If you worry too
much about passing with high grades, you
will write exams in your dreams! If you
worry too much about relationships, you
will fight with someone in your dream. So
wake up to what your dreams indicate to
you. There is nothing more to interpret
from your dreams. Wake up and see what
is as it IS.

[^1]: Buddha - Enlightened master and founder of the religion of Buddhism.
[^2]:  J. Krishnamurti - Renowned Indian philosopher.
