# Worry – a legacy passed down

Worry is an unwanted legacy passed down
from grandparents to parents to children.
Children are like sponges. They simply
absorb the body language and attitude of
the parents. The parents are not even aware
this is happening. For example, if a child
hears the mother repeating a certain worry
four or five times, the child simply
internalizes the habit. He grows up
repeating statements unnecessarily, which
is one attribute of worry.

Ultimately he carries the worry with him
into marriage and then both he and his wife
must deal with it, even though it was
originally his mother’s concern. They will
then hand it down to their children, unless
they stop naming it and learn to live with
what IS.

_A man was pushing his baby in a pram.
The baby was screaming at the top of
his voice. All the while the man kept
repeating quietly, ‘Keep calm George.
Don’t scream. It will be okay.’_

_His wife told him to keep quiet._

_A woman who was watching this said
to the wife, ‘Why are you so rude to
him? He is really doing his best to
pacify your son!’_

_The wife looked at her with resentment,
pointed to her husband and told her,
‘He is George.’_

When parents express constant worry,
children grow up thinking life goes on only
because of worry! Understand that life goes
on not because of us, but in spite of us!

_One man had just moved into a remote
part of a village. One day, he was seen
throwing handfuls of bread crumbs around his
house._

_His neighbor who was watching him
asked him, ‘What are you doing?’_

_The man replied, ‘I am keeping the
tigers away.’_

_The neighbor was surprised. He said,
‘But there are no tigers in these parts!’_

_The man replied, ‘That’s right. Very
effective, isn’t it?’_

This is how we are trained to worry! The
other day, I read a survey about worries. It
said that forty percent of the things we
worry about never happen, thirty percent
are in the past and can’t be helped, twelve
percent concern the affairs of others that
are not our business, ten percent are about
illnesses that are mostly imagined, eight
percent are worth worrying about but they
are also not worth the energy to worry.
They can be overcome by simply putting
faith into action. So really, zero percent of
our worries are worth the effort!

People will believe anything that is said
with statistics! So I am talking with
statistics. Otherwise, just one line is
enough: don’t worry, just do. Things will
happen as they should!

The problem is that parents expect their
children to worry! If they don’t worry, they
brand them as uncaring. It is possible to
care without worrying. Care is _doing_, worry
is _chattering_. There is no use chattering.
Chattering is like trying to cross a bridge
before it comes.
